Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.University of Exeter researchers asked children aged 9-11 about the moral status and treatment of farm animals (pigs), pets (dogs) and people. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.Unlike adults, children say farm animals should be treated the same as people and pets, and think eating animals is less morally acceptable than adults do. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.The findings suggest that "speciesism" -- a moral hierarchy that gives different value to different animals -- is learned during adolescence. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.Humans' relationship with animals is full of ethical double standards," said Dr Luke McGuire, from the University of Exeter. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.Some animals are beloved household companions, while others are kept in factory farms for economic benefit. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.Judgements seem to largely depend on the species of the animal in question: dogs are our friends, pigs are food. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.The research team -- including the University of Oxford -- surveyed 479 people, all living in England, from three age groups: 9-11, 18-21 and 29-59. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.The two adult groups had relatively similar views -- suggesting attitudes to animals typically change between the ages of 11 and 18. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.Something seems to happen in adolescence, where that early love for animals becomes more complicated and we develop more speciesism," said Dr McGuire Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.It's important to note that even adults in our study thought eating meat was less morally acceptable than eating animal products like milk. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.So aversion to animals -- including farm animals -- being harmed does not disappear entirely. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.The study also found that, as people age, they are more likely to classify farm animals as "food" rather than "pets" -- while children were equally likely to consider pigs to fall into either of these categories. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.While adjusting attitudes is a natural part of growing up, Dr McGuire said the "moral intelligence of children" is also valuable. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.If we want people to move towards more plant-based diets for environmental reasons, we have to disrupt the current system somewhere," he said. Children differ dramatically from adults in their moral views on animals, new research shows.For example, if children ate more plant-based food in schools, that might be more in line with their moral values, and might reduce the 'normalisation' towards adult values that we identify in this study. 