Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.The American Academy of Pediatrics recently highlighted the importance of students' returning to the classroom in its COVID-19 return-to-school guidance. Jason Wang, MD, PhD, of Stanford Health Policy also believes it's time for kids in the United States to get back to school. But he believes school districts could better protect their 55 million K-12 students by adhering to an additional set of strict measures. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Prolonged school closures can exacerbate socioeconomic disparities, causing negative education and health outcomes, and amplifying existing educational inequalities," said Wang, a pediatrician and director of the Center for Policy, Outcomes and Prevention in the Stanford School of Medicine. "School closure may also aggravate food insecurity, domestic violence and mental health disorders. Many children from low-income households obtain food through the National School Lunch Program, and estimates suggest that 1 in 4 children may face hunger this year due to COVID-19. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.But serious precautions must first be put into place, Wang said, starting with each school district establishing a COVID-19 task force composed of the superintendent, members of the school board, teachers, parents and health care professionals to develop policies and procedures. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.To implement and evaluate specific measures, the task force should create and oversee a command center for the school district, composed of data analysts and health experts who can liaise with the local health department," Wang writes in a JAMA Pediatrics article with co-author Henry Bair, a medical student at the Stanford School of Medicine who is also working on an MBA at the university's graduate school of business. The article will be published Aug. 11. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Three-pronged testing approach Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.The academy's guidance does not include ways schools can test for the virus, so the authors recommend that school districts collaborate with local hospitals to: Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.In addition, the authors recommend that district task forces: Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Wang concedes these are expensive measures. But as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention noted in its July 24 telebriefing on new resources and tools to support opening schools: The 5.6 million parents who haven't been able to work due to school closures have collectively lost an estimated $232 billion in earnings. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Stricter measures mean bigger budgets Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Some low-resource communities might find these guidelines difficult to adopt. Those transparent desk barriers, for example, range from $100 to $200 per desk; COVID-19 tests run between $50 and $200 per individual. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Wang said that's why additional federal funding and state subsidies are crucial for the low-income communities already hit by the double whammy of having more parents as essential workers and some of the highest hospitalization and fatality rates from the pandemic. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Low-income communities are suffering most from shelter-in-place policies because parents who are essential workers are out of the home and not able to help with online learning," Wang said. "And many children in these communities also live in crowded conditions that are not conducive to learning at home. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Wang and Bair note the academy's guidelines emphasize the importance of identifying symptoms and signs of COVID-19, but don't go far enough in recommending operational approaches. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.To address this, we recommend that schools implement multilevel screening for students and staff," they write. Each morning parents should report any fever or COVID-19 symptoms to an online or an automated telephone-based program maintained by the school or district. Any students with symptoms should stay home. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Even with all the precautions in place, COVID-19 outbreaks within schools are still likely, the authors said. Schools should prepare for temporary closures and be ready to transition back to full-time online education by investing in remote education platforms and training. Weary working parents aren't the only ones eager for their children to return to school in a few weeks. Many teachers, staff and administrators also want those classroom doors to reopen. Most importantly, kids are craving the clamor of school hallways and interaction with their friends.Schools will need to ensure equitable implementation of online education among students, especially those with limited knowledge of or access to technological resources and consider subsidizing educational technologies for these students," the authors write. 