NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.Each week the piano-sized New Horizons spacecraft transmits data  stored on its digital recorders from its flight through the Pluto system  on July 14. These latest pictures are part of a sequence taken near New  Horizons' closest approach to Pluto, with resolutions of about 250-280  feet (77-85 meters) per pixel -- revealing features less than half the  size of a city block on Pluto's diverse surface. In these new images,  New Horizons captured a wide variety of cratered, mountainous and  glacial terrains. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.These close-up images,  showing the diversity of terrain on Pluto, demonstrate the power of our  robotic planetary explorers to return intriguing data to scientists  back here on planet Earth," said John Grunsfeld, former astronaut and  associate administrator for NASA's Science Mission Directorate. "New  Horizons thrilled us during the July flyby with the first close images  of Pluto, and as the spacecraft transmits the treasure trove of images  in its onboard memory back to us, we continue to be amazed by what we  see. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.These latest images form a strip 50 miles (80 kilometers) wide on a  world 3 billion miles away. The pictures trend from Pluto's jagged  horizon about 500 miles (800 kilometers) northwest of the informally  named Sputnik Planum, across the al-Idrisi mountains, over the shoreline  of Sputnik, and across its icy plains. (To view the strip in the  highest resolution possible, click here and zoom in.) NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.These new images give us a breathtaking, super-high resolution  window into Pluto's geology," said New Horizons Principal Investigator  Alan Stern, of the Southwest Research Institute (SwRI) in Boulder,  Colorado. "Nothing of this quality was available for Venus or Mars until  decades after their first flybys; yet at Pluto we're there already --  down among the craters, mountains and ice fields -- less than five  months after flyby! The science we can do with these images is simply  unbelievable. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.These new images are six times better than the resolution of the  global Pluto map New Horizons obtained, and five times better than the  best images of Pluto's cousin Triton, Neptune's large moon, obtained by  Voyager 2 in 1989. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.Mission scientists expect more imagery from this set over the next  several days, showing even more terrain at this highest resolution. NASA's New Horizons spacecraft has sent back the first in a series of  the sharpest views of Pluto it obtained during its July flyby -- and  the best close-ups of Pluto that humans may see for decades.Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B0xkupKwjfM 