An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.Researchers compared DNA samples from eight extinct Australian rodents, as well as 42 of their living relatives, to look at the decline of native species since the arrival of Europeans in Australia. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.The study showed the extinct Gould's mouse was indistinguishable from the Shark Bay mouse, still found on several small islands off the coast of Western Australia. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.According to lead author Dr Emily Roycroft from The Australian National University (ANU), the result is both exciting and sobering. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.The resurrection of this species brings good news in the face of the disproportionally high rate of native rodent extinction, making up 41 per cent of Australian mammal extinction since European colonisation in 1788," Dr Roycroft said. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.It is exciting that Gould's mouse is still around, but its disappearance from the mainland highlights how quickly this species went from being distributed across most of Australia, to only surviving on offshore islands in Western Australia.It's a huge population collapse. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.In addition to Gould's mouse, the study examined seven other extinct native species. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.All had relatively high genetic diversity immediately before extinction, suggesting they had large, widespread populations prior to the arrival of Europeans. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.This shows genetic diversity does not provide guaranteed insurance against extinction," Dr Roycroft said. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.The extinction of these species happened very quickly. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.They were likely common, with large populations prior to the arrival of Europeans. But the introduction of feral cats, foxes, and other invasive species, agricultural land clearing and new diseases have absolutely decimated native species. An Australian mammal thought to have been wiped out over 150 years ago can now be crossed off our list of extinct animals, following a new study.We still have a lot of biodiversity to lose here in Australia and we're not doing enough to protect it. 