New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.Researchers from Edith Cowan University (ECU) used sophisticated machine learning techniques to analyse 5000 points on faces to measure facial asymmetry in parents of children on the autism spectrum. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.The research team from ECU, UWA and Telethon Kids Institute have previously found children on the autism spectrum were more likely to have greater facial asymmetry than non-autistic children. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.This is important because better understanding of facial characteristics of autistic people contribute to efforts for early identification and help to understand hereditary (or genetic) causal links. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.Genetic factors are known to play a major role in autism however there is growing evidence that environmental factors, such as hormones or maternal health, could also influence development of the condition. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.In the current study researchers compared the facial asymmetry of 192 parents of autistic children to 163 adults with no known history of autism. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.They found parents of children on the autism spectrum had more asymmetric faces than other adults of a similar age. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.ECU School of Science Research Fellow Dr Syed Zulqarnian Gilani said the research was an important step in better understanding the genetic causes of autism. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.These findings suggest there could be a link between the genes which affect the likelihood of an individual having greater facial asymmetry and autism," he said. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.By using these cutting-edge 3D scans of faces combined with machine learning techniques we can distinguish between thousands of subtle differences in faces to determine an overall facial asymmetry score. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.When we compared those scores, we saw that faces of parents of autistic children were more likely to have higher asymmetry compared to other adults. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.A new way of looking at autism  New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.According to Dr Diana Tan, the project's lead author and a Postdoctoral Research Associate at UWA and Telethon Kids Institute, the research helps increase our understanding of autism. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.Autism is not traditionally known to be a condition with distinctive facial features, but our research has challenged this notion," she said. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.Our study provided evidence that the genetic factors leading to the development of autism may also express in physical characteristics, which leads to our understanding of the interplay between genes, physical and brain development in humans. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.We previously examined another facial marker -- facial masculinity -- that was associated with autism. The next step of this project would be to evaluate the usefulness of combining facial asymmetry and masculinity in determining the likelihood of autism diagnosis. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.The project was a collaboration between researchers from ECU, The University of Western Australia, and Telethon Kids Institute. New Australian research is using high-tech 3D facial scans to give us a better understanding of the genetic causes of autism.'Facial asymmetry in parents of children on the autism spectrum' was published in Autism Research. 