Immune activity is necessary for metabolic response to fasting The researchers scanned the DNA of liver cells and immune cells, examining which parts of their DNA were active and which messenger-molecules were being released as a result. Their findings showed that these cells were communicating with one-another and highlighted the role of a molecule that is expressed in almost all the cells in our bodies, namely the glucocorticoid receptor. "We discovered that in the immune cells, this receptor in particular allowed the crosstalk between the cell types during fasting. By deleting the receptor only in the immune cells, we saw a breakdown of fasting signals in the liver cells. This means that the immune cells are able to directly influence the effect of fasting on our metabolism," says Anne Loft from Helmholtz Munich. Giorgio Caratti and Jan Tuckermann from the Ulm University add: "In fact, this is the first time we have seen this process under 'healthy' conditions. We knew that immune responses could influence our metabolism in an unhealthy setting, but this was new. It proves that a low level of immune activity, or inflammation, is necessary for a balanced metabolic response to fasting. Voluntary fasting has been shown to be beneficial for the prevention of a number of human metabolic diseases, including type 2 diabetes and obesity. The increase in people suffering from not only these metabolic diseases is staggering, showing no signs of slowing down. Our findings serve to understand the molecular mechanisms behind these diseases and may ultimately lead to the development of effective fasting-based therapies," says Stephan Herzig who led study at Helmholtz Munich. Prof. Stephan Herzig is Director of the Helmholtz Diabetes Center at Helmholtz Munich. He holds the Chair for Molecular Metabolic Control at TUM and an Honorary Chair at Heidelberg University. Dr. Anne Loft is first author of the study at Helmholtz Munich. Both are part of the German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD). Dr. Giorgio Caratti from the Ulm University, Institute of Comparative Molecular Endocrinology is co-author of the study and works at Prof. Jan Tuckermann's lab who led the study together with Stephan Herzig. 