One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.New research from the U-M School of Nursing found that depression in new mothers rose considerably during the pandemic. Before COVID, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that 1 in 8 women experienced postpartum depression, and about 5-7% experienced major depressive symptoms, said lead author Clayton Shuman, U-M assistant professor of nursing. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.The study, "Postpartum depression and associated risk factors during the COVID-19 pandemic" appears in BMC Research Notes. It comes from a larger study called "COVID-19 MAMAS (Maternal Attachment, Mood, Ability, and Support)," which gave rise to several papers about pregnancy and postpartum experiences during COVID. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.For this paper, researchers collected survey data between February and July 2020 from 670 U.S. postpartum patients who completed the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale online and provided demographic information. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.Their research found that: One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.Shuman says he was surprised by how many women screened positive for depression and major depression. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.We also found that almost 1 in 5 participants who screened positive for postpartum depression reported having thoughts of harming themselves. This is very concerning given that prior to the pandemic, Dr. Lindsay Admon and colleagues from U-M found the rate of suicidality among prenatal and postpartum patients is on the rise in the U.S. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.There are several possible reasons for the breastfeeding finding, Shuman said. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.Previous research found that breastfeeding support resources such as lactation consults were limited during early COVID and may have increased distress or caused people to switch to formula. Stress from supply chain problems that resulted in formula shortages could have also contributed to depression. Finally, studies suggest that breastfeeding may help to protect postpartum patients from postpartum depression, helping to minimize the severity of depressive symptoms and improving recovery time. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.This increase highlights the need to identify depressive symptoms in postpartum patients, but screening is only a first step, Shuman said. One in three new mothers during early COVID-19 screened positive for postpartum depression -- nearly triple pre-pandemic levels -- and 1 in 5 had major depressive symptoms, say University of Michigan researchers.Treatment is pivotal to recovery," he said. "Resources and education about postpartum depression must be better disseminated and implemented. These resources should be shared with the general public to reduce stigma, and shared with those who provide social and emotional support to postpartum patients, such as partners and family members. 