A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.Co-led by Gerry Wright, professor of biochemistry & biomedical sciences, the discovery opens the door to the development of new drugs targeting malaria, one of the deadliest infectious diseases on the planet. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.Collaborating with professor Tim Gilberger of the University of Hamburg in Germany, the researcher teams performed a screen of soil bacteria extracts for antimalarials and identified an extremely potent inhibitor of malaria development. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.We've shined a new light here," said Wright, the inaugural lead of Canada's Global Nexus for Pandemics and Biological Threats at McMaster. "We're looking at a part of chemistry that nobody has ever looked at before. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.This breakthrough, published today in Cell Chemical Biology, comes at a pivotal time in global malaria management, Wright said. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.Drug resistance in malaria is becoming "a huge problem," he said, and climate change is pushing malaria-carrying mosquitoes to new places, broadening the disease's spread. The World Health Organization estimates that malaria was responsible for more than 400,000 deaths and 229 million infections in 2019 alone. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.Wright said that the family of compounds under study -- duocarmycins -- have been known to kill malaria and cancer cells for some time; however, they are extremely toxic to humans. As such, using them as treatment comes with considerable collateral damage, which has resulted in many failed clinical trials. Wright calls these compounds 'anti-life,' since they kill just about everything in their path. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.However, PDE-I2, the new compound molecule discovered by the McMaster-Hamburg team, appears to come with all of the potent malaria-killing properties of previously known duocarmycins -- just without the adverse effects. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.Wright said the discovery was a decade in the making, beginning when he and Gilberger worked together at McMaster between 2010 and 2014. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.Since then, the Wright laboratory has been sending thousand of sub-fractions from Hamilton to Hamburg, where Gilberger and his team would assay them against malaria parasites at the Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.It was years of trial-and-error before the researchers finally fractionated the right molecule -- a process Wright likens to finding a needle in a haystack. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.This novel compound represents a useful scaffold for anti-malaria therapy," said Gilberger, who added that he is excited to explore its efficiency in systemic infections and to pinpoint its mode of action. A study out of the Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research at McMaster University has resulted in the discovery of a promising new antimalarial compound.The main funding for the research study came from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research. 