Most people who smoke e-cigarettes want to quit and many have tried to reduce their use, according to Rutgers researchers.The study, published in the journal Nicotine & Tobacco Research, is the first to examine e-cigarette users' past attempts and current intentions to quit e-cigarettes in a representative sample of adult e-cigarette users in the United States. Most people who smoke e-cigarettes want to quit and many have tried to reduce their use, according to Rutgers researchers.About 10 million U.S. adults smoke e-cigarettes. Most of these users also smoke traditional cigarettes, though many use them to try to quit traditional cigarettes. Most people who smoke e-cigarettes want to quit and many have tried to reduce their use, according to Rutgers researchers.The study found that more than 60 percent of e-cigarette users want to quit using e-cigarettes and 16 percent plan to quit in the next month. More than 25 percent have tried to quit using e-cigarettes in the past year. Most people who smoke e-cigarettes want to quit and many have tried to reduce their use, according to Rutgers researchers.Most of the discussion about e-cigarettes has focused on the relative harm as compared to traditional cigarettes, the efficacy of e-cigarettes as a cessation device, and the alarming increase of their use in children. In addition to those issues, our data suggests that e-cigarette users do not want to use these devices forever. Eventually, they want to stop using e-cigarettes the same way a traditional smoker wants to quit smoking cigarettes," said study co-author Marc Steinberg, an associate professor of psychiatry at Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School and the director of the school's Tobacco Research and Intervention lab. Most people who smoke e-cigarettes want to quit and many have tried to reduce their use, according to Rutgers researchers.The strategies that people reported using to quit e-cigarettes include many of the strategies we recommend for quitting traditional cigarettes such as FDA-approved nicotine replacement products or medications, counseling, and social support," said study author Rachel Rosen, a graduate student in the Department of Psychology. Most people who smoke e-cigarettes want to quit and many have tried to reduce their use, according to Rutgers researchers.While e-cigarettes may be associated with reduced harm as compared to combustible cigarettes, they also are potentially addicting and the e-cigarette aerosol still contains toxic substances," she said. "As e-cigarette use continues to increase and as more e-cigarette users want to quit, it will be important to be ready to help those who may have difficulty stopping on their own. 