Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.ASMR, which stands for Autonomous Sensory Meridian Response, has swept the internet with millions watching viral clips of whispered voices, delicate hand movements or tapping. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.Mysteriously only some people feel this relaxing tingling sensation that spreads down the spine. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.Dr Giulia Poerio, from the Department of Psychology, has discovered those who feel it are hypersensitive to the world around them. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.The research published in The Journal of Research in Personality uncovered that they are more bothered by noise and movement and are easily overstimulated. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.They are also more attuned to their bodily sensations such as noticing physical changes when experiencing emotions. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.Dr Poerio said: "It really is a double-edged sword. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.Highly sensitive people may be able to experience intensely pleasurable feelings like ASMR but this high sensitivity also has downsides. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.For example, the noise of a pen clicking or someone chewing gum could set off a negative reaction, which others would simply ignore. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.More than 500 participants were recruited for the study and assessed for ASMR experience and measured for sensory sensitivity. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.Dr Poerio now hopes to build on the findings with a view to explain how and why intensely positive emotions are experienced -which may lead to new therapeutic techniques. Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.We know much less about positive emotions compared to negative ones, especially when considering complex emotional experiences like ASMR," added Dr Poerio Fans of ASMR videos are more likely to be sensitive to their surroundings and feelings, University of Essex research has revealed.I'm interested in trying to understand these under-researched emotions so that we might find ways of enhancing them in people's everyday lives. 