Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Meningiomas are treated with surgery and in some cases radiation, but there are few other effective therapies, and even with optimal therapy, recurrences are common: About half of all patients with intermediate (grade 2) meningiomas will have a recurrence within 5 years of treatment, and 90% of patients with the most advanced (grade 3) meningiomas will experience recurrences within 5 years. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Only about half of all patients with recurrent aggressive grade 2 meningiomas and none with grade 3 disease can be expected to survive for 10 years. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.But as Priscilla Brastianos, MD, from the Mass General Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School (HMS) and colleagues now report, a class of cancer drugs known as immune checkpoint inhibitors can slow disease progression and offer hope for longer survival of patients with high-grade meningiomas. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.They report their findings in the open-access journal Nature Communications. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.In the past our understanding of the molecular underpinnings of meningiomas has been limited, and it has only been within the last few years that we have begun to understand the immune microenvironment of meningiomas," says Brastianos. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Recent studies have suggested that the tumor microenvironment -- the environment around a tumor that includes blood vessels, immune cells and chemical signals -- may suppress immune responses to meningiomas. Immune checkpoint inhibitors such as pembrolizumab block PD-1, a protein that prevents the immune system from mounting a defense against tumors. The drug effectively releases the brakes on the immune system, allowing it to accomplish its tumor-identifying and destroying functions. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.To see whether immunotherapy could be effective in patients with high-grade meningiomas, Brastianos and colleagues conducted a phase 2 trial in which they treated 25 patients with recurrent and progressive grade 2 or 3 meningiomas with the immune checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.The trial met its primary goal, with nearly half of all patients alive and without evidence of disease progression for at least 6 months. Half of the patients were still alive 20 months after treatment. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Side effects of therapy were similar to those seen in other studies of pembrolizumab and were manageable. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Our study shows that it's both practical to conduct clinical trials for meningiomas -- a disease for which there have been very few studies -- and that pembrolizumab has promising activity against meningiomas, and needs to be studied further in larger groups of patients," says Brastianos. Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Study co-authors included investigators from Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (Boston); the Chenevert Family Brain Tumor Center, Smilow Cancer Hospital and Yale Cancer Center and Yale School of Medicine (New Haven, CT); and Wilmot Cancer at the University of Rochester (NY). Meningiomas, tumors of the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord, are the most common tumors of the central nervous system. Although most meningiomas are low grade and cause few or no symptoms, a subset, called high-grade meningiomas, can cause serious neurologic and cognitive problems and have high mortality rates.Study funding was provided by Merck, the maker of pembrolizumab, and philanthropic support from Alexandra Drane, Doug Drane and Antonio Bertone. 