A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.The team who discovered it think it could be a neutron star or a white dwarf -- collapsed cores of stars -- with an ultra-powerful magnetic field. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Spinning around in space, the strange object sends out a beam of radiation that crosses our line of sight, and for a minute in every twenty, is one of the brightest radio sources in the sky. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Astrophysicist Dr Natasha Hurley-Walker, from the Curtin University node of the International Centre for Radio Astronomy Research, led the team that made the discovery. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.This object was appearing and disappearing over a few hours during our observations," she said. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.That was completely unexpected. It was kind of spooky for an astronomer because there's nothing known in the sky that does that. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.And it's really quite close to us -- about 4000 lightyears away. It's in our galactic backyard. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.The object was discovered by Curtin University Honours student Tyrone O'Doherty using the Murchison Widefield Array (MWA) telescope in outback Western Australia and a new technique he developed. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.It's exciting that the source I identified last year has turned out to be such a peculiar object," said Mr O'Doherty, who is now studying for a PhD at Curtin. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.The MWA's wide field of view and extreme sensitivity are perfect for surveying the entire sky and detecting the unexpected. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Objects that turn on and off in the Universe aren't new to astronomers -- they call them 'transients'. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.ICRAR-Curtin astrophysicist and co-author Dr Gemma Anderson said that "when studying transients, you're watching the death of a massive star or the activity of the remnants it leaves behind. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.'Slow transients' -- like supernovae -- might appear over the course of a few days and disappear after a few months. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.'Fast transients' -- like a type of neutron star called a pulsar -- flash on and off within milliseconds or seconds. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.But Dr Anderson said finding something that turned on for a minute was really weird. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.She said the mysterious object was incredibly bright and smaller than the Sun, emitting highly-polarised radio waves -- suggesting the object had an extremely strong magnetic field. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Dr Hurley-Walker said the observations match a predicted astrophysical object called an 'ultra-long period magnetar'. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.It's a type of slowly spinning neutron star that has been predicted to exist theoretically," she said. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.But nobody expected to directly detect one like this because we didn't expect them to be so bright. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Somehow it's converting magnetic energy to radio waves much more effectively than anything we've seen before. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Dr Hurley-Walker is now monitoring the object with the MWA to see if it switches back on. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.If it does, there are telescopes across the Southern Hemisphere and even in orbit that can point straight to it," she said. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Dr Hurley-Walker plans to search for more of these unusual objects in the vast archives of the MWA. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.More detections will tell astronomers whether this was a rare one-off event or a vast new population we'd never noticed before," she said. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.MWA Director Professor Steven Tingay said the telescope is a precursor instrument for the Square Kilometre Array -- a global initiative to build the world's largest radio telescopes in Western Australia and South Africa. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Key to finding this object, and studying its detailed properties, is the fact that we have been able to collect and store all the data the MWA produces for almost the last decade at the Pawsey Research Supercomputing Centre. Being able to look back through such a massive dataset when you find an object is pretty unique in astronomy," he said. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.There are, no doubt, many more gems to be discovered by the MWA and the SKA in coming years. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.The Murchison Widefield Array is located on the Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory in Western Australia. The observatory is managed by CSIRO, Australia's national science agency, and was established with the support of the Australian and Western Australian Governments. We acknowledge the Wajarri Yamatji as the traditional owners of the observatory site. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.The Pawsey Supercomputing Research Centre in Perth-a Tier 1 publicly funded national supercomputing facility-helped store and process the MWA observations used in this research. A team mapping radio waves in the Universe has discovered something unusual that releases a giant burst of energy three times an hour, and it's unlike anything astronomers have seen before.Shanghai Astronomical Observatory (SHAO) is a member of the MWA. China's SKA Regional Centre Prototype, funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China and the Chinese Academy of Sciences, is hosted by SHAO and contributed to processing the MWA observations used in this research. 