Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.The study, led by the University of Exeter, found two Vibrio species -- Vibrio rotiferianus and Vibrio jasicida - that have never been recorded in UK waters before. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.These species can harm sea creatures such as shellfish, but the increasing range of Vibrio species also raises concerns for human health. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Some Vibrio bacteria can cause gastroenteritis when eaten in raw or undercooked shellfish, and the bacteria can also cause skin infections. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.The researchers say the spread of Vibrio species has resulted in a "worldwide surge" of Vibriosis infections in humans and aquatic animals. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Vibrio species can often be found in UK waters in summer, when temperatures are more favourable for them," said Dr Sariqa Wagley, of the University of Exeter. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.With sea-surface temperatures rising due to climate change, Vibrio activity in the waters is more common, and the diversity of Vibrio species is now increasing. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.The study used Met Office data to identify locations where summer sea-surface temperatures were favourable for Vibrio bacteria (based on average number of days per year warmer than 18°C). Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Researchers then analysed shellfish samples from four sites used by the shellfish industry -- Chichester Harbour, Osea Island, Whitstable Bay and Lyme Bay. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.We found Vibrio parahaemolyticus -- the leading cause of seafood-borne gastroenteritis worldwide -- at Chichester Harbour," Dr Wagley said. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Vibrio alginolyticus, which can also cause illness in humans, was identified at three of the sites that had sea-surface temperatures above 18°C (Chichester Harbour, Osea Island and Whitstable Bay). Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.It is important to note that thorough cooking kills harmful Vibrio bacteria in seafood. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.However, increasing abundance and diversity of Vibrio bacteria creates health risks not only for people eating seafood, but for those using the sea for recreation purposes -- either due to swallowing infected seawater or from the bacteria entering exposed wounds or cuts. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Vibrio bacteria are also a threat to a variety of marine species including shellfish themselves. Disease costs the global aquaculture industry £6 billion a year, and this burden of disease can be devastating. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.We have not seen mass mortality of shellfish due to Vibrio bacteria here in the UK yet, but this has occurred elsewhere -- including in France and Australia. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Dr Wagley added: "Our findings support the hypothesis that Vibrio-associated diseases are increasing and are influenced by the rise in sea-surface temperature. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.We need to monitor this situation closely, to protect human health, marine biodiversity and the seafood industry. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Dr Joanne Preston, from the University of Portsmouth, said: "It is important to monitor the impact of increasing sea surface temperature on potential shellfish pathogens, not just for human health and safety, but also to understand the resilience of our coastal species and habitats to climate change. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Dr Luke Helmer, from the Blue Marine Foundation and the University of Portsmouth, added: "The impacts of climate change on the marine environment are likely to be widespread. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.Understanding how these changes will affect ecologically and commercially important species and the people that rely on them will be crucial moving forward, in order to mitigate against them. Rising temperatures are causing a "growing diversity" of Vibrio bacteria in the sea around the UK, new research shows.The study -- funded by Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) -- was supported by Chichester and Havant Council and Sussex Inshore Fisheries and Conservation Authority. 