Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.The Pazyryk carpet is the world's oldest example of a knotted-pile  carpet and is kept at the State Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg,  Russia. The carpet, which was made out of new wool at around 400 BC, is  one of the most exciting examples of central Asian craftsmanship from  the Iron Age. Ever since the carpet was discovered in 1947 by Russian  archaeologists in a kurgan tomb in the Altai mountains, experts in  traditional dyeing techniques have been puzzled by the vivid red, yellow  and blue colours of the carpet, which lay buried in extreme conditions  for almost two thousand five hundred years. Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.  Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.Red fibres under the microscope Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.  Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.Prof. Dr. Karl Meßlinger from the Institute of Physiology and  Pathophysiology at FAU, and x-ray microscopy experts Dr. Andreas Späth  and Prof. Dr. Rainer Fink from the Chair of Physical Chemistry II at FAU  have now shed some light on this secret. Together, they came up with  the idea of imaging the distribution of pigments across the cross  section of individual fibres of wool using high-resolution x-ray  fluorescence microscopy (?-XRF). Dr. Späth and Prof. Fink conducted the  experiments using the PHOENIX x-ray microscope at the Paul Scherrer  Institute in Villigen, Switzerland. With three to five micrometres, the  microscope provides sufficient spatial resolution combined with high  sensitivity for characteristic chemical elements. Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.Fermenting sheep's wool before it is dyed increases the brilliance  and longevity of the colour. Fermented wool can be identified by the  raised position of the layers of the cuticle along the fibres or by the  characteristic distribution of pigments across the cross-section of the  fibres. The latter is shown in the x-ray fluorescence images (left). The  cuticle layer has fallen off the samples of fibre from the Pazyryk  carpet (right). The influence of the fermentation process is still  visible by comparing the fluorescence images (bottom) with those of  recently dyed samples. Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.The study focused mainly on red wool fibres, as the pigment Turkey  red has been in use almost exclusively for centuries in Central Asia and  in the Far East to create a characteristic shade of red. Turkey red is a  metal organic complex made of alizarin, which is derived from the roots  of the rose madder, and aluminium. '?-XRF imaging shows the  characteristic distribution of the aluminium along the cross section of  fermented wool fibres,' explains Dr. Andreas Späth. 'We found the same  pattern in fibres from the Pazyryk carpet.' This is by far the earliest  example of the fermentation technique and provides an insight into the  already highly-developed techniques used by textile craftsmen and women  in the Iron Age. The results also show the high potential of x-ray  microscopy for analysing samples of textiles from archaeological sites.  Up to now, research in this field has used scanning electron microscopy  (SEM). Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.  Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.Fermented wool does not fade Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.  Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.Prof. Dr. Karl Meßlinger received a sample of some knots from the  Pazyryk carpet 30 years ago in 1991 for analysis with a scanning  electron microscope. Together with Dr. Manfred Bieber, an expert in  oriental textile dyeing techniques, he previously discovered that SEM  imaging can identify wool fibres that have been treated with a special  dyeing technique based on previous fermentation of the wool. The  fermentation process increases the diffusion of the pigments towards the  centre of the wool fibres resulting in significantly more brilliant and  permanent colours. Fermented wool can be identified by SEM imaging by  means of the characteristic raised position of the outermost layers of  the cuticle. 'Traditional Anatolian textile craftspeople are familiar  with a less costly yet reliable technique,' says Meßlinger. 'They spread  the dyed wool out on a field for several weeks in direct sunlight, then  put it in a barn as bedding for their animals before rinsing it out in a  stream or river. Only fermented wool retains its colour without any  significant bleaching.' Why are the red, yellow, and blue colours used in the world's oldest  knotted-pile carpet still so vivid and bright, even after almost two and  a half thousand years? Researchers at Friedrich-Alexander-Universität  Erlangen-Nürnberg have now been able to uncover the secrets behind the  so-called Pazyryk carpet using high-resolution x-ray fluorescence  microscopy. Their findings have been published in the journal Scientific Reports.Prof. Meßlinger and Dr. Bieber were able to trace the origins of this  traditional dyeing technique back to the 17th century. However, the  more the treated textile is used or the more it is exposed to the  elements, the less remains of the cuticle layers. Most of the cuticle  layers of the world-famous Pazyryk carpet were also missing. The  researchers succeeded in proving the effect of fermentation by comparing  the fluorescent images with those of samples of wool they fermented and  dyed themselves. 