A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.The work is supported by the National Institutes of Health and is published in Biophysical Journal. A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.Purdue University innovators developed a stabilized form of human calcitonin, which is a peptide drug already used for people with osteoporosis. Researchers at Purdue created a prodrug form of the peptide hormone to increase its effectiveness as an osteoporosis treatment. A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.In humans, calcitonin is the hormone responsible for normal calcium homeostasis. When prescribed to osteoporosis patients, calcitonin inhibits bone resorption, resulting in increased bone mass. A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.Unfortunately, human calcitonin undergoes fibrillation in aqueous solution, leading to reduced efficacy when used as a therapeutic. As a substitute, osteoporosis patients are prescribed salmon calcitonin. It does not fibrillate as rapidly but suffers from low potency and the potential for several adverse side effects. A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.The technology can help make these calcitonin drugs safer and more effective," said Elizabeth Topp, a Purdue professor of physical and industrial pharmacy. "Our approach will increase the therapeutic potential of human calcitonin, promising a more effective option to replace salmon calcitonin for osteoporosis and related disorders. A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.To decrease the fibrillation propensity and increase the therapeutic benefit of human calcitonin, Purdue researchers phosphorylated specific amino acid residues. A novel form of a drug used to treat osteoporosis that comes with the potential for fewer side effects may provide a new option for patients.Many promising new peptide drugs tend to form fibrils," Topp said. "This technology provides a way to stabilize them in a reversible way so that the stabilizing modification comes off when the drug is given to the patient. 