Researchers from the University of New Hampshire have mapped magnetic fields in three dimensions, a major step toward solving what they call the "grand challenge" of revealing 3D magnetic configuration in magnetic materials. The work has implications for improving diagnostic imaging and capacity in storage devices.The number three really represents a breakthrough in this field," said Jiadong Zang, associate professor of physics. "Our brain is a three-dimensional object. It's ironic that all our devices are two-dimensional. They're underperforming compared to our brains. Researchers from the University of New Hampshire have mapped magnetic fields in three dimensions, a major step toward solving what they call the "grand challenge" of revealing 3D magnetic configuration in magnetic materials. The work has implications for improving diagnostic imaging and capacity in storage devices.The study, published recently in the journal Nature Materials, provides the results of three years of high-performance numerical simulations, mapping a three-dimensional structure of a 100 nanometer magnetic tetrahedron sample using only three projection angles of electron beams. Zang points to computed tomography medical imaging, or CT scans, as an example. Instead of sending multiple beams of X-rays to map tissues in the body the same images could be produced with only three beams. Researchers from the University of New Hampshire have mapped magnetic fields in three dimensions, a major step toward solving what they call the "grand challenge" of revealing 3D magnetic configuration in magnetic materials. The work has implications for improving diagnostic imaging and capacity in storage devices.Reducing electron beam exposure in fast three-dimensional magnetic imaging is one potential application for this collaborative research. The researchers' findings also have implications for improving storage capacity of magnetic memory devices, which currently deposit circuits onto two-dimensional panels that are approaching maximum density. Researchers from the University of New Hampshire have mapped magnetic fields in three dimensions, a major step toward solving what they call the "grand challenge" of revealing 3D magnetic configuration in magnetic materials. The work has implications for improving diagnostic imaging and capacity in storage devices.The method offered by this research will be a useful tool to detect and characterize three-dimensional magnetic circuits. Researchers from the University of New Hampshire have mapped magnetic fields in three dimensions, a major step toward solving what they call the "grand challenge" of revealing 3D magnetic configuration in magnetic materials. The work has implications for improving diagnostic imaging and capacity in storage devices.Zang and Alexander Booth, a former UNH doctoral student, conducted the theoretical analysis. Researchers from Japan and the University of Wisconsin performed the physical experiments. Funds from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES) under award number DE-SC0020221 helped support Zang and Booth's contributions to this research. Researchers from the University of New Hampshire have mapped magnetic fields in three dimensions, a major step toward solving what they call the "grand challenge" of revealing 3D magnetic configuration in magnetic materials. The work has implications for improving diagnostic imaging and capacity in storage devices.The University of New Hampshire inspires innovation and transforms lives in our state, nation and world. More than 16,000 students from all 50 states and 71 countries engage with an award-winning faculty in top-ranked programs in business, engineering, law, health and human services, liberal arts and the sciences across more than 200 programs of study. A Carnegie Classification R1 institution, UNH partners with NASA, NOAA, NSF and NIH, and received $260 million in competitive external funding in FY21 to further explore and define the frontiers of land, sea and space. 