Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.Carbon emissions from soils in tropical forests -- which store one quarter of the world's soil carbon -- could increase dramatically if temperatures continue to rise in line with current predictions, researchers say. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.A new experiment conducted in Panama suggests these harmful emissions of soil carbon could rise by 55 per cent if the climate warms by four degrees Celsius. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.Carbon dioxide is released naturally by soils through decomposition and plant root activity. However, the release of so much extra carbon dioxide -- which the study found was coming from increased decomposition of soil organic matter -- could trigger further global warming. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.Previous research has shown that rising temperatures threaten to release carbon locked away in cooler or frozen soils -- such as in the Arctic tundra. Until now, tropical soils were thought to be less sensitive to the effects of climate warming. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.A team led by researchers from the University of Edinburgh conducted a large-scale experiment in a tropical forest on Barro Colorado Island in the Panama Canal. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.They built heating devices and buried them one metre into the forest soil. Over a two-year period the equipment -- fitted with heating cables and a thermostat -- kept the experimental areas four degrees warmer than the surrounding soil. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.The findings show that as much as an extra eight tonnes of soil carbon could be released as carbon dioxide from every hectare of tropical forest each year at the higher temperatures. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.Researchers expect the rate of emissions will eventually decline in the experimentally warmed soils, but they do not yet know how long this will take, or the long-term impact of soil warming on climate change. Billions of tonnes of carbon dioxide risk being lost into the atmosphere due to tropical forest soils being significantly more sensitive to climate change than previously thought.They will continue the experiment -- known as the Soil Warming Experiment in Lowland Tropical Rainforest, or SWELTR -- to better understand how tropical forests respond to a warming world. 