Helicobater pylori, a bacteria implicated in peptic ulcers and gastritis, was eradicated in 95 percent patients who took a 7-day course of combination therapy with levofloxacin, omeprazole, nitazoxanide (Alinia®) and doxycycline (LOAD) compared to eradication in only 80.9 percent of patients on lansoprazole, amoxicillin and clarithromycin (LAC) for seven days.Results of a new study presented at the Annual Scientific Meeting of the American College of Gastroenterology reveal LOAD therapy is superior to LAC at eliminating the bacterium in patients with gastritis and peptic ulcers. Moreover, Dr. Patrick Basu and his colleagues at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons found that a shorter course of the four-drug combination, seven days vs. a ten-day treatment, is equally effective. Helicobater pylori, a bacteria implicated in peptic ulcers and gastritis, was eradicated in 95 percent patients who took a 7-day course of combination therapy with levofloxacin, omeprazole, nitazoxanide (Alinia®) and doxycycline (LOAD) compared to eradication in only 80.9 percent of patients on lansoprazole, amoxicillin and clarithromycin (LAC) for seven days.The study included 135 patients with treatment naïve Helicobacter pylori infection who were randomized to LOAD (7 or 10 days) vs. LAC (10 days). There was a total wash out period of six weeks from any prior antibiotic and PPI use prior to the initiation of therapy. Helicobater pylori, a bacteria implicated in peptic ulcers and gastritis, was eradicated in 95 percent patients who took a 7-day course of combination therapy with levofloxacin, omeprazole, nitazoxanide (Alinia®) and doxycycline (LOAD) compared to eradication in only 80.9 percent of patients on lansoprazole, amoxicillin and clarithromycin (LAC) for seven days.H. pylori gastritis is a global threat for gastric carcinoma and many therapies have been explored to eradicate this infection with variable success rates," explained Dr. Basu. "Our study demonstrates the therapeutic superiority of LOAD therapy over LAC therapy in a treatment naïve population of patients with H. pylori. 