A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.The study, led by The Australian National University (ANU), identified predictors that put endangered languages at high risk. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Co-author Professor Lindell Bromham said that of the world's 7,000 recognised languages, around half were currently endangered. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.We found that without immediate intervention, language loss could triple in the next 40 years. And by the end of this century, 1,500 languages could cease to be spoken. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Published in Nature Ecology and Evolution, they study charts the widest range of factors ever putting endangered languages under pressure. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.One finding was that more years of schooling increased the level of language endangerment. The researchers say it shows we need to build curricula that support bilingual education, fostering both indigenous language proficiency as well as use of regionally-dominant languages. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Across the 51 factors or predictors we investigated, we also found some really unexpected and surprising pressure points. This included road density," Professor Bromham said. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Contact with other local languages is not the problem -- in fact languages in contact with many other Indigenous languages tend to be less endangered. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.But we found that the more roads there are, connecting country to city, and villages to towns, the higher the risk of languages being endangered. It's as if roads are helping dominant languages 'steam roll' over other smaller languages. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.The researchers say the findings also have important lessons for preserving many of the endangered languages spoken by Australia's First Nations peoples. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Australia has the dubious distinction of having one of the highest rates of language loss worldwide," Professor Felicity Meakins, from the University of Queensland and one of the study's co-authors, said. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Prior to colonisation, more than 250 First Nations languages were spoken, and multilingualism was the norm. Now, only 40 languages are still spoken and just 12 are being learnt by children. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.First Nations languages need funding and support. Australia only spends $20.89 annually per capita of the Indigenous population on languages, which is abysmal compared with Canada's $69.30 and New Zealand's $296.44. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Professor Bromham said that as the world enters the UNESCO Decade of Indigenous Languages in 2022, the study's findings were a vital reminder that more action was urgently needed to preserve at-risk languages. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.When a language is lost, or is 'Sleeping' as we say for languages that are no longer spoken, we lose so much of our human cultural diversity. Every language is brilliant in its own way. A world-first study warns 1,500 endangered languages could no longer be spoken by the end of this century.Many of the languages predicted to be lost this century still have fluent speakers, so there is still the chance to invest in supporting communities to revitalise indigenous languages and keep them strong for future generations. 