A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.That compound is tartrolon E, a byproduct of bacteria that help shipworms, a group of saltwater clams, digest the wood they eat. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.According to research recently published in PLOS Pathogens, the compound, unlike any other, is proven to kill causal parasites for malaria, toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis, theileriosis and babesiosis. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.There are compounds that work against the individual parasites, but to find one that works against this entire group, that is what made this unique," said Roberta O'Connor, an associate professor in Washington State University's Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology unit, and first author on the paper. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.While there are already effective drugs for many of the parasites mentioned here, O'Connor said this group of parasites, called apicomplexans, readily develops drug resistance. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.Development of new, effective drugs against apicomplexan parasites is an ongoing need for human and veterinary medicine," she said. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.One of those parasites in need of a more effective remedy is Cryptosporidium. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.Cryptosporidium, a waterborne zoonotic parasite, is a major cause of diarrhea in children, immunocompromised patients, and in newborn animals worldwide. The parasite infects millions of humans and agricultural animals annually. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.In addition to killing this class of parasites in vitro, tartrolon E was able to kill Cryptosporidium in newborn mice. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.Beginning this summer, WSU researchers will test the compound against Cryptosporidium in lambs. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.Currently, nitazoxanide is the only drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat cryptosporidiosis. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.Nitazoxanide doesn't work well for those [patients] who are immunocompromised or malnourished and those are the people most vulnerable to Cryptosporidium," O'Connor said. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.O'Connor is the principal investigator on the study which will characterize the specific effects of tartrolon E on Cryptosporidium parasites. Villarino will lead the pharmacokinetics portion of the study in immunocompromised mice to further assess tartrolon E's effectiveness and optimal dose regimens. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.The research is made possible by a recently awarded 5-year, $1.6 million grant from the National Institutes of Health. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.We will define how the drug behaves in the body and how much of the drug is needed to control Cryptosporidiuminfection," Villarino said. "We want the maximum effect with minimal adverse effects. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.This aspect of the research on the compound is a key component for drug development. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.This could have a significant impact on human and veterinary medicine because there is no other drug that can effectively treat this condition," Villarino said. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.O'Connor and Villarino are hopeful tartrolon E will lead to a clinically developed drug but they know it is a long way to get there. A compound discovered in the gills of wood-eating clams could be the solution to a group of parasites responsible for some of the world's most common infections.Tartrolon E is obviously hitting some system that is common to [all] these parasites," O'Connor said. "Even if this compound isn't successful, if we can determine the mechanism, we will have identified a common drug target for all these parasites. 