Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.Researchers at Northwestern University and Argonne National Laboratory have developed a new material that opens doors for a new class of neutron detectors. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.With the ability to sense smuggled nuclear materials, highly efficient neutron detectors are critical for national security. Currently, there are two classes of detectors which either use helium gas or flashes of light. These detectors are very large -- sometimes the size of a wall. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.Northwestern and Argonne's material introduces a third class: a semiconductor that can absorb neutrons and generate electrical signals that can be easily measured. The semiconductor-based detector is also highly efficient and stable. It can be used both in small, portable devices for field inspections and very large detectors that use arrays of crystals. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.The study will be published in the Jan. 16 issue of the journal Nature. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.People have imagined semiconductor neutron detectors for a long time," said Northwestern's Mercouri Kanatzidis, who led the research. "The idea was there, but no one had the right material to do it. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.Kanatzidis is the Charles E. and Emma H. Morrison Professor of Chemistry in Northwestern's Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences. He has a joint appointment with Argonne. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.When heavy elements, such as uranium and plutonium, decay, their atoms eject neutrons from their nuclei. Most neutron detectors are so-called scintillators that work by sensing ejected neutrons and then emitting light to alert the user. This new material is a semiconductor and does not emit light, but instead directly detects electrical signals induced by the neutrons. In addition to security applications, neutron detectors are used in radiation safety, astronomy, plasma physics, materials science and crystallography. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.Whereas classic types of thermal neutron detectors have been in use since the 1950s, a practical semiconductor material has remained elusive. Excellent at absorbing neutrons, lithium quickly emerged as the most promising material for neutron detecting devices. But integrating lithium into a semiconductor and making it stable (lithium crumbles when it meets water) was another story. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.You can find good semiconductors, but they don't have lithium," Kanatzidis said. "Or you can find stable lithium compounds that are not good semiconductors. We found the best of both worlds. The specific lithium-6 isotope, which is reasonably abundant and low cost, is a strong neutron absorber. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.In their study, Kanatzidis and his team discovered the right combination of materials to make a working device that also keeps lithium stable. Their new material -- lithium-indium-phosphorus-selenium -- is layered in structure and enriched with the lithium-6 isotope. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.The crystal structure is special," Kanatzidis said. "The lithium is inside the layers, so water cannot reach it. That's a big, important feature of this material. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.The resulting semiconductor neutron detector can detect thermal neutrons from even a very weak source -- and can do so within nanoseconds. It also can discriminate between neutrons and other types of nuclear signals, such as gamma rays. This prevents false alarms. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.One final added bonus: the material contains a very high amount of lithium. So a smaller fraction of the material can absorb the same amount of neutrons as a giant device. This leads to devices small enough to fit in your hand. Homeland Security might soon have a new tool to add to its arsenal.It's important to have all sizes of neutron detectors and as many kinds as possible, such as our new semiconductor," Kanatzidis said. "You want ones that are as big as a wall, where you can pass a truck right by it. But you also want small ones that can be portable for inspections out in the field. 