Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.The pervasiveness of this old-meets-new technology, especially on college campuses, intrigued University at Buffalo computer scientist Zhanpeng Jin. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.We have so many students walking around with speakers in their ears. It led me to wonder what else we could do with them," says Jin, PhD, associate professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering in the UB School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.That curiosity has led to EarEcho, a biometric tool a research team led by Jin is developing that uses modified wireless earbuds to authenticate smartphone users via the unique geometry of their ear canal. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.A prototype of the system, described in this month's Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, a journal published quarterly by the Association for Computing Machinery, proved roughly 95% effective. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.UB's Technology Transfer office has filed a provisional patent application for the technology. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.How EarEcho works Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.The team built the prototype with off-the-shelf products, including a pair of in-ear earphones and a tiny microphone. Researchers developed acoustic signal processing techniques to limit noise interference, and models to share information between EarEcho's components. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.When a sound is played into someone's ear, the sound propagates through and is reflected and absorbed by the ear canal -- all of which produce a unique signature that can be recorded by the microphone. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.It doesn't matter what the sound is, everyone's ears are different and we can show that in the audio recording," says Jin. "This uniqueness can lead to a new way of confirming the identity of the user, equivalent to fingerprinting. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.The information gathered by the microphone is sent by the earbuds' Bluetooth connection to the smartphone where it is analyzed. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.To test the device, 20 subjects listened to audio samples that included a variety of speech, music and other content. The team conducted tests in different environmental settings (on the street, in a shopping mall, etc.) and with the subjects in different positions (sitting, standing, head tilted, etc.). Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.EarEcho proved roughly 95 percent effective when given 1 second to authenticate the subjects. The score improved to 97.5 percent when it continued to monitor the subject in 3 second windows. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.How EarEcho can be used Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.Theoretically, users could rely on EarEcho to unlock their smartphones, thereby reducing the need for passcodes, fingerprints, facial recognition and other biometrics. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.But Jin sees its greatest potential use in continuously monitoring a smartphone user. EarEcho, which works when users are listening to their earbuds, is a passive system, meaning users need not take any action, such as submitting a fingerprint or voice command, for it to work, he says. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.Such a system, he argues, is ideal for situations where users are required to verify their identity such as making mobile payments. It also could eliminate the need to re-enter passcodes or fingerprints when a phone locks up after not being used. Visit a public space. Chances are you'll see people wearing earbuds or earphones.Think about that," says Jin, "just by wearing the earphones, which many people already do, you wouldn't have to do anything to unlock your phone. 