A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.Food insecurity is a household's lack of consistent access to adequate food resources. The study examined a nationally representative sample of 1,574 college students in 1999-2003 to assess whether they lived in a household experiencing food insecurity. They found that nearly 15 percent of the students qualified as food insecure. Following up on data on educational attainment through 2015-2017, the researchers found that students in the food-insecure group were more than 40 percent less likely to graduate from college and more than 60 percent less likely to achieve a graduate or professional degree. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.Food-insecure students whose parents and grandparents had not attended college fared even worse in terms of educational attainment -- less than half graduated from college. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.The study appears online in the September issue of Public Health Nutrition. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.These results suggest that we really need robust policies to address food insecurity among college students, especially now with the higher food insecurity levels observed during the COVID-19 pandemic," says study lead author Julia Wolfson, PhD, assistant professor in the Department of International Health at the Bloomberg School. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.For the study, Wolfson and her colleagues examined data from a long-running U.S. government-sponsored project called the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, which has followed a nationally representative set of several thousand families in the U.S. since 1968, using annual -- or, since 1997, biennial -- surveys to collect sociodemographic, economic, and health information on family members. The researchers drew from this dataset a sample of 1,574 individuals who were enrolled in higher education at any point during the 1999-2003 surveys and were still being tracked in the 2015 or 2017 surveys. They classified a student as food-insecure if they or their parents reported being food-insecure at any point when they were college students in 1999-2003. Most of the students in the sample attended college while living at home as dependents in a household. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.Even after adjusting for other factors known to be linked to higher or lower educational attainment, Wolfson and colleagues found a strong inverse association between household food insecurity and educational attainment. Students from food-insecure households were 43 percent less likely to graduate from college, including with an associate's degree; 43 percent less likely to attain a bachelor's degree; and 61 percent less likely to attain a graduate or professional degree, compared to non-food-insecure students. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.The analysis suggested that being a "first-generation student" -- the first in a family to attend college -- was another factor strongly associated with lower educational attainment. While 76 percent of students who were "food secure" and not first-generation students graduated from college, only 59 percent of food secure but first-generation students graduated from college -- and less than half, only 47 percent, of food-insecure first-generation students graduated. A study led by a researcher at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that food insecurity among college students is associated with lower college graduation rates and lower chances of obtaining a bachelor's or advanced degree.The study, Wolfson notes, is thought to be the first to examine food insecurity's effects on educational attainment in a study that tracks data for the same group of people over time. These results suggest that food insecurity is not just associated with but a contributing cause of lower educational attainment. 