As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.A new Cornell University-led study identifies several keys to sustainably managing the influx, with an emphasis on battery chemistry, second-life applications and recycling. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.What to do with all these retired electric vehicle batteries is going to be a huge issue," said Fengqi You, professor in energy systems engineering at Cornell, who used advanced modeling to examine environmental and economic tradeoffs in how batteries are built, used and recycled. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.The life-cycle analysis, which considered a variety of options for battery materials and technologies, is detailed in research published in Science Advances. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.Lithium-ion batteries are designed today for performance and not for recycling or second life," said You, noting that electric vehicle batteries typically last five to 12 years before they lose the energy capacity needed to power a vehicle. "There's very little discussion right now about these environmental dimensions of improving battery design for recycling or reuse. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.One finding is that a battery's chemistry can affect its overall environmental impact. For instance, cobalt is a common battery material that, when mined, is energy-intensive and damaging to the environment. Replacing cobalt with nickel can alleviate those concerns, but most life cycle scenarios reveal there are tradeoffs. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.Cobalt's presence, even at relatively small amounts, in a battery cathode leads to a much less oxidative environment for other components, extending the lifespan of the battery and increasing options for second-life use and materials recycling," said Lynden Archer, dean of engineering at Cornell and co-author of the study. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.But, Archer said, cobalt's expense -- and association with exploitative child labor -- has led the material to be "conventionally thought of as undesirable in the low-cost batteries needed for an 'electrify-everything' future. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.The analysis also found that an electric vehicle battery's overall carbon footprint can be reduced by up to 17% if it can be reused before it is recycled. One choice for battery reuse is power stations that store wind and solar energy. Such energy storage is growing in demand and can make use of retired batteries with reduced energy capacity. And as the share of renewable energy contributing to the power grid grows, a reused battery's carbon footprint shrinks by around a quarter. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.Most of today's recycling facilities have difficulty breaking apart heavily fortified car batteries and recovering the raw materials within. Yanqiu Tao, a doctoral student who co-authored the study, said policymakers should consider ways to incentivize recycling techniques that optimize the battery's sustainability. As electric vehicle production revs up across the globe, an inherent consequence will be the mutually growing number of retired lithium-ion batteries that, unlike traditional lead-acid car batteries, are difficult to dispose of.In the study we consider the commonly used graphite as the anode-active material, which is hard to recycle and emits carbon dioxide when it's combusted," Tao said. "If policymakers can promote graphite separation or emerging recycling methods, it would reduce the environmental impact. 