People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.The paper argues that new borrowers -- especially young people and those of an "impulsive" disposition -- need protection to prevent them falling into long-term debt. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.It says lenders should have a duty of care, requiring them to consider age, experience and personality traits, which can be detected by psychometric tests. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.The study, by Professor Stephen Lea of the University of Exeter, reviews evidence on the psychology of debt, and makes recommendations to help reduce debt problems. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.I argue that -- similar to obtaining a driving licence -- people should have to demonstrate their competence before taking out debts that could have long-term negative consequences," Professor Lea said. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Some people are particularly susceptible to debt problems. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.This includes those of an impulsive disposition, but it particularly applies to young people -- and debts contracted early in life can have long-term ill effects. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Accordingly, steps need to be taken to protect people at this vulnerable life stage. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Although this would involve a restriction of the financial freedom of people who are legally adults, the evidence suggests that access to credit should be controlled more carefully. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Speaking about rules relating to people of an "impulsive" disposition, Professor Lea said: "Lenders might well resist such regulations, but in fact financial advisors are already required to assess risk preference when advising people on investments. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.This shows that such a measure can be brought in without too much difficulty or expense to those who have to implement it. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Professor Lea acknowledges that debt is heavily influenced by economic inequality, and that no psychological factor can prevent debt if excessive socio-economic disadvantage is not addressed. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.He also says the current Covid-19 pandemic is likely to increase debt problems. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.His recommendations include tackling poverty (reducing the "decades-long drift towards greater inequality in almost all countries") and intensifying regulation of high-cost lenders. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Recommending better financial education of children, Professor Lea said: "Many people are shockingly bad at assessing credit deals. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.What seems to be needed is fluency in seeing, without effortful calculation, what is or is not a good deal when borrowing money. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.The paper calls for policies to improve people's awareness of their credit position, and says debtors should be advised to seek independent advice before dealing with lenders to whom they owe money. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.He concludes: "If all these recommendations were adopted overnight, the problems of debt in society would not go away. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Credit enhances consumer choice and is a necessary function in a modern economy, and so long is credit is available, some people will get into difficulties with debt. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.But, as is the case with poverty itself, neither the extent nor the level of debt is fixed. People borrowing money for the first time should only be given small amounts until they have proved their competence, a new study says.Appropriate policies, such as those proposed here, could reduce both. 