Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.The twisted-claw millipede Nannaria swiftae joins 16 other new species described from the Appalachian Mountains of the United States. These little-known invertebrates have a valuable role as decomposers: breaking down leaf litter, they release their nutrients into the ecosystem. They live on the forest floor, where they feed on decaying leaves and other plant matter, and in fact, they are somewhat tricky to catch, because they tend to remain buried in the soil, sometimes staying completely beneath the surface. Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.Scientists Derek Hennen, Jackson Means, and Paul Marek, at Virginia Tech, U.S., describe the new species in a research paper published in the open access journal ZooKeys. The research was funded by a National Science Foundation Advancing Revisionary Taxonomy and Systematics grant (DEB# 1655635). Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.Because of their presence in museum collections, scientists long suspected that the twisted-claw millipedes included many new species, but these specimens went undescribed for decades. To fix this, the researchers began a multi-year project to collect new specimens throughout the eastern U.S. They traveled to 17 US states, checking under leaf litter, rocks, and logs to find species so that they could sequence their DNA and scientifically describe them. Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.Looking at over 1800 specimens collected on their field study or taken from university and museum collections, the authors described 17 new species, including Nannaria marianae, which was named after Hennen's wife. They discovered that the millipedes prefer to live in forested habitats near streams and are often found buried under the soil, exhibiting more cryptic behaviors than relatives. Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.The newly-described millipedes range between 18 and 38 mm long, have shiny caramel-brown to black bodies with white, red, or orange spots, and have white legs. The males have small, twisted and flattened claws on their anterior legs, which is the basis for their common name. Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.The lead author of the study, Derek Hennen, is a fan of Taylor Swift. Taylor Swift, U.S. singer-songwriter known for hits such as "Shake It Off" and "You Belong With Me," has earned a new accolade -- she now has a new species of millipede named in her honor.Her music helped me get through the highs and lows of graduate school, so naming a new millipede species after her is my way of saying thanks," he says. 