Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.University of Exeter researchers used Google Earth and Google Street View to estimate that verges account for 2,579 km2 (almost 1,000 square miles) of land. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.About 27% of these verges are frequently mown, 41% is wilder grassland, 19% is woodland and the rest is scrub. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.There are "significant opportunities" to improve verges by reducing mowing and planting trees, the researchers say. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.Our key message is that there's a lot of road verge in Great Britain and we could manage it much better for nature," said lead author Ben Phillips, of the Environment and Sustainability Institute on Exeter's Penryn Campus in Cornwall. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.About a quarter of our road verges are mown very regularly to make them look like garden lawns -- this is bad for wildlife. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.Previous research has shown that reducing mowing to just once or twice per year provides more flowers for pollinators, allows plants to set seed and creates better habitats for other animals. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.Phillips said: "Some parts of verges need to be mown regularly for safety, but many verges could be mown much less, and this could save money due to reduced maintenance costs. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.We found that only a quarter of frequently mown verges had trees, so there's potential to add trees and shrubs, which will also help to capture carbon. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.But tree planting must be done carefully to avoid damaging flower-rich grass verges, and to prevent any impacts on visibility for drivers, or damage to infrastructure from roots and branches. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.Planting trees in some verges could provide a wide range of benefits for people, nature and the environment, and contribute towards the UK government's tree-planting ambitions. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.As well as estimating land area of verges, the study found that 1.8% of Great Britain is covered by hard road surfaces. Road verges cover 1.2% of land in Great Britain -- an area the size of Dorset -- and could be managed to help wildlife, new research shows.The charity Plantlife is currently running a campaign called #NoMowMay, asking gardeners and councils to "lock up your lawnmower" for the month of May. 