If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:In an effort to help address this growing national problem, two physicians at Johns Hopkins Medicine, Simon Mathews, M.D., and Martin Makary, M.D., M.P.H., have proposed five quality measures for medical billing. The metrics are detailed in an article in the Feb. 4, 2020, issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA). If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:In recent years, patient care and outcomes have been significantly improved by applying quality science to medicine, benchmarking the performance of both health care providers and facilities, yet there are no standardized metrics for billing quality," says Makary, professor of surgery at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and an authority on health care quality. If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:We hope that our proposal will be the first step toward achieving the goal of national billing quality standards," says Mathews, assistant professor of medicine and head of clinical innovation at Johns Hopkins Medicine's Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality. If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:The Billing Quality 5-Star Rating System that Matthews and Makary propose includes the following measures: If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:Itemized bills -- Are patients routinely provided an itemized bill with items explained in plain English? If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:and If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:The NQF is a non-profit organization that promotes patient protections and health care quality through measurement and public reporting. In 2009, it established the first list of serious reportable events (also known as "never events"), a set of largely preventable and harmful clinical practices and behaviors -- such as operating on the wrong part of the body or having to remove a foreign object left behind during surgery -- that should never occur. If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:Given the wide variation in both pricing and collection practices by hospitals, measures of billing practices are needed," the authors stated in the JAMA article. "Billing quality is a type of medical quality. If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:The authors also write that ." .. metrics of billing quality could be used to create public accountability for U.S. hospitals" and that ." .. incorporating measures of billing quality into reports of overall hospital quality could provide patients with a more complete assessment of a given medical center or practice. If you're concerned about rising health care costs and overwhelming medical bills, you're not alone. According to statistics reported in 2019:Financial toxicity -- the difficulties a patient has related to the cost of medical care -- is a medical complication," Makary says. "Taking care of a patient means taking care of the whole person. 