A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The effects at ground level are expected to be limited, but there is a good chance for some excellent auroral displays in the north. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The extra-large two solar flares occurred at 23:24 GMT on 6 March and 00:14 GMT March 7, throwing off a huge cloud of magnetised plasma from the Sun's atmosphere -- the corona -- into interplanetary space. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.These Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) often occur in association with a solar flare. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.Dramatic events spotted by ESA and NASA missions A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.These dramatic events were detected by the ESA/NASA SOHO and NASA SDO spaceborne solar observatories. Together with other space organisations, ESA experts are closely monitoring the storm. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The two flares followed an earlier flare, which occurred on 04:05 GMT on 5 March. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.All three came from a new active region on the Sun that was first detected on 2 March. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The plasma cloud left the Sun at an estimated 2300 km/s -- unusually fast. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.However, the angle combined with deceleration from the background solar wind means that it is expected to arrive some hours later than this initial estimated speed alone would indicate. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.Satellites to experience increased effects A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.In addition, a strong stream of high-energy protons has been generated. This 'storm' of subatomic particles was created by the shock wave ahead of the CME. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.It is therefore likely that satellites orbiting Earth will experience increased radiation levels today as a result," says Juha-Pekka Luntama, Head of Space Weather in ESA's Space Situational Awareness office. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.Space radiation levels are expected to remain high throughout 8 March and possibly for one to two days longer. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.In addition, the arrival of the geomagnetic storm could affect systems including GPS navigation satellite signals and satellite communications. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.ESA spacecraft already affected A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The Venus Express spacecraft, now orbiting Venus and much closer to the Sun than Earth, was affected by the radiation on 7 March. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The startracker cameras that help Venus Express measure its position and orientation in space were 'blinded' starting at 01:41 GMT. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.The Mission Control Team has taken the startrackers out of service and is maintaining the spacecraft's attitude using gyroscopes until the solar effects fade," says Octavio Camino, Venus Express Spacecraft Operations Manager at ESA's European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.Alexi Glover, an ESA space weather scientist, says that the solar region causing the current activity has a complex magnetic configuration and is now close to the centre of the Sun's disc. A pair of unusually large solar flares early yesterday (March 7, 2012) generated a  Coronal Mass Ejection that will reach Earth around mid-day today. It  will likely cause at least a strong geomagnetic storm that could affect  satellites in space and trigger auroral displays.So there is a good chance of more large events in the coming days," she notes. 