Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.A new study published in the journal PLOS ONE today outlines how remaining within the goals of the Paris Agreement would save many species. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.The research also identifies places that could be restored to better protect biodiversity and contribute towards global ecosystem restoration targets. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.Researcher Rhosanna Jenkins carried out the study as part of her PhD at UEA's School of Environmental Sciences. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.She said: "This research shows how many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.But remaining within the goals of the Paris Agreement, which aims to keep global warming well below 2°C, ideally at 1.5°C, would save many species. This is because large areas of the basin act as refugia from climate change. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.With higher warming levels, not only are the refuges lost but also the potential for restoration becomes more limited. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.The United Nations declared the 2020s as the 'Decade on Ecosystem Restoration'. Our results show the importance of considering climate change within these restoration efforts. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.With higher levels of warming, many of the species you are trying to restore will no longer be able to survive in the places they were originally found. Many species within Kenya's Tana River Basin will be unable to survive if global temperatures continue to rise as they are on track to do -- according to new research from the University of East Anglia.Strong commitments from global leaders ahead of the COP climate change summit in Glasgow are needed to stand any chance of avoiding the loss of species -- which for the Tana River Basin is clearly indicated by this work. 