Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.Myocarditis is a rare but serious condition that causes inflammation of the heart muscle. It can weaken the heart and its electrical system, and it can make it difficult for the heart to pump blood. An episode of myocarditis may resolve on its own or with treatment or may result in long-lasting damage. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.While COVID-19 is a virus that predominantly leads to acute respiratory illness, there has been a small group of individuals who also experience cardiac complications," said Enrico Ammirati, M.D., Ph.D., co-lead author of the study and a cardiologist at De Gasperis Cardio Center and Transplant Center at Niguarda Hospital in Milan, Italy. "A small study previously indicated acute myocarditis is a rare occurrence in people infected with COVID-19. Our analysis of international data offers better insight to the occurrence of acute myocarditis during COVID-19 hospitalization, particularly before the COVID-19 vaccines were widely available. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.The international study examined health data for almost 57,000 people who were hospitalized with COVID-19 from February 2020 until April 2021, and who received care at 23 hospitals across the United States and Europe. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.Within the large study group, a total of 54 people hospitalized with COVID-19 were identified as having definite or probable acute myocarditis, based upon results of heart muscle biopsy and/or magnetic resonance imaging. Most of the people in this study were non-Hispanic white adults (76.5%), with an average age of 38 years, and more than half were male (61%). All had confirmed cases of COVID-19 infection based upon standard laboratory testing, and none had received a COVID-19 vaccination prior to developing myocarditis. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.The study analysis found: Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.The authors note the potential rate of COVID-19 related myocarditis may be between 1.2-5.7 per 1,000 people hospitalized for COVID-19. Some people were identified with possible myocarditis based on preliminary testing, yet they were not included in the final analysis because they did not meet all of the study's protocols. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.This analysis indicates that, although rare, hospitalized patients with acute myocarditis associated with COVID-19 infection have a much greater need for intensive care unit admission, in up to 70.5% of the cases, despite the average age of the individuals in the study being much younger than expected at 38 years old," said co-lead study author Marco Metra, M.D., a cardiology professor at the Institute of Cardiology and in the department of medical and surgical specialties, radiological sciences and public health at the University of Brescia in Brescia, Italy. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.The study has several limitations. Because the analysis was retrospective, there may have been some potential selection bias. Additionally, 43 individuals with possible acute myocarditis were excluded due to a lack of imaging or biopsy information. People older than 70 years of age were also not included because of a higher chance of age-related cardiac issues visible on magnetic resonance imaging. Some people were not screened for other viruses or immunological causes of myocarditis, so there may have been other contributing factors. Further, in some of the hospitals that were heavily hit early in the pandemic, some people with acute myocarditis may have been missed. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.Co-authors are Laura Lupi, M.D.; Matteo Palazzini, M.D.; Nicholas S. Hendren, M.D.; Justin L. Grodin, M.D., M.P.H.; Carlo V. Cannistraci, Eng., Ph.D.; Matthieu Schmidt, M.D.; Guillaume Hekimian, M.D.; Giovanni Peretto, M.D.; Thomas Bochaton, M.D.; Ahmad Hayek, M.D.; Nicolas Piriou, M.D.; Sergio Leonardi, M.D.; Stefania Guida, M.D.; Annalisa Turco, M.D.; Simone Sala, M.D.; Aitor Uribarri, M.D.; Caroline M. Van de Heyning, M.D., Ph.D.; Massimo Mapelli, M.D.; Jeness Campodonico, M.D.; Patrizia Pedrotti, M.D.; Maria Isabel Barrionuevo Sánchez, M.D.; Albert Ariza Sole, M.D.; Marco Marini, M.D.; Maria Vittoria Matassini, M.D.; Mickael Vourc'h, M.D.; Antonio Cannatà, M.D.; Daniel I. Bromage, M.D.; Daniele Briguglia, M.D.; Jorge Salamanca, M.D.; Pablo Diez-Villanueva, M.D., Ph.D.; Jukka Lehtonen, M.D.; Florent Huang, M.D.; Stéphanie Russel, M.D.; Francesco Soriano, M.D.; Fabrizio Turrini, M.D.; Manlio Cipriani, M.D.; Manuela Bramerio, M.D.; Mattia Di Pasquale, M.D.; Aurelia Grosu, M.D.; Michele Senni, M.D.; Davide Farina, M.D.; Piergiuseppe Agostoni, M.D.; Stefania Rizzo, M.D., Ph.D.; Monica De Gaspari, M.D.; Francesca Marzo, M.D.; Jason M. Duran, M.D., Ph.D.; Eric D. Adler, M.D.; Cristina Giannattasio, M.D., Ph.D.; Cristina Basso, M.D., Ph.D.; Theresa McDonagh, M.D.; Mathieu Kerneis, M.D.; Alain Combes, M.D.; Paolo G. Camici, M.D.; and James A. de Lemos, M.D. Authors' disclosures are listed in the manuscript. Acute myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle typically triggered by a virus, occurred in about two out of every 1,000 people hospitalized with COVID-19, and was associated with more severe illness and complications in people with COVID-19, especially among people who also had pneumonia, according to new research published today in the American Heart Association's flagship, peer-reviewed journal Circulation.This study was funded by an Italian Ministry Grant and the Registry for Cardio-Cerebro-Vascular Pathology in Veneto Region, Italy. 