Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.Wallabies naturally have a brown or gray coat, which is what geneticists call a wild-type gene expression, or phenotype. Research team leader Akihiko Koga noticed that cases of white baby wallabies being born to wild-type mothers were reported from different countries. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.I wondered if there was a recent common ancestor as the source of albinism," says Koga. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.The opportunity to investigate this hypothesis arrived on one fateful day in 2015 when a pale-skinned wallaby was born to a normal colored mother at Noichi Zoo in Kochi, Japan. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.The team examined the gene for the enzyme tyrosinase or TYR, known for its role in producing melanin, the natural skin pigment. In the TYR gene, they discovered that an extra DNA fragment led to the mutation, that is the loss of the last two-thirds portion of the gene protein. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.This is akin to copying and pasting a word inside a tweet before posting it, causing an equal length of text at the end of the tweet to exceed the word count; this figuratively "pushes" the essential word off the end, rendering the tweet incomplete and confusing. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.The mutation was caused by a copy of the genetic material of a retrovirus, such as HIV, and inserted into the host wallaby. This copy is called an endogenous retrovirus, which was detected using a simple polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, test which is currently in common use for determining viral infections, such as sars-covid. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.Easier said than done as the mutant gene was elusive and challenging to find in mammalian albinos, including primates and racoon dogs. But the team succeeded with a marsupial. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.We found this inserted fragment in a wallaby, which we fittingly named walb," mentions Koga. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.The walb gene insertion is likely to have occurred by one of the following three processes: 1) endogenization, which is infection by an exogenous virus -- derived from another organism; 2) reinfection by an earlier generation virus; or 3) retrotransposition, defined as a relocation of an endogenous retrovirus within a cell. Kyoto University has discovered for the first time a genetic cause of albinism, or loss of pigmentation, in the small kangaroo-like wallaby.While the process has not yet been identified at this point, Koga's team has deduced that it is a recent evolutionary event. Such mutant genes tend to remove themselves from the family tree if its genetic expression is disadvantageous for the wallaby's survival in the wild. 